K8s Network Model Diagrams (#39890)
kubernetes/website: content/en/docs/concepts/services-networking/_index.md

with the desire for Kubernetes to enable low-friction porting of your apps from VMs
to containers. If your app previously ran in a VM, your VM had an IP address and could
talk to other VMs in your project. This is the same basic model.

Kubernetes imposes the following requirements on any networking
implementation (barring any intentional network segmentation policies):

* Containers in same pod can communicate with each other.
* Pods can communicate with all other pods on the same or separate [nodes](/docs/concepts/architecture/nodes/)
without network address translation (NAT).
* Pods can communicate with other pods on the same or separate nodes using layer 2 bridging, native layer 3 (IPv4, IPv6) networking, tunneling, or other techniques for conveying packets from one pod to another.

Some platforms, such as Linux, support pods running in the host network. Pods attached to the host network of a node can still communicate with all pods on all nodes without NAT.

## Terminology

* IPv4 address - 32 bit IP addresses assigned to pod interfaces, host interfaces, L2 bridges, tunnel end-points and any other network resource requiring IPv4 connectivity. An example is `192.68.13.1`.
  

> * IPv6 address - 128 bit IP address assigned to pod interfaces, host interfaces, L2 bridges, L3 routers, tunnel end-points and any other network resources requiring IPv6 connectivity. You can configure one or more IPv6 addresses on an interface. An example is `2001:db8:3333:4444:5555:6666:7777:8888.`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* IPv6 address - 128 bit IP address assigned to pod interfaces, host interfaces, L2 bridges, L3 routers, tunnel end-points and any other network resources requiring IPv6 connectivity. You can configure one or more IPv6 addresses on an interface. An example is `2001:db8:3333:4444:5555:6666:7777:8888`.
```

  
  * Pods run in their own [network namespace](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man7/network_namespaces.7.html). All the containers in a pod share this
    network namespace. (Network namespaces are not the same as the Kubernetes
    {{< glossary_tooltip text="namespace" term_id="namespace" >}} concept).
    
  * You can assign an Ethernet mac address to each Pod.
    Kubernetes does not require that a Pod has a unique identity at the data-link layer.
 
* Pods use a virtual point-to-point veth "link" between the pod network namespace and root network namespace. This allows pod packets to utilize network functions defined in the root network namespace.  
  
* L2bridge is a virtual L2 bridge that allows attachment, configuration and communications between pods on the same node. Depending on your deployment of container runtimes and CNI plugins, this bridge function could be implemented within the CNI plugin itself.  

> * [Network plugins](/docs/concepts/extend-kubernetes/compute-storage-net/network-plugins/#:~:text=A%20CNI%20plugin%20is%20required,releases%20of%20the%20CNI%20specification.) allow pods to communicate even when the source pod destination pod are running on different nodes. Network plugins achieve this in different ways. Networks plugins are also known as _CNI plugins_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* [Network plugins](/docs/concepts/extend-kubernetes/compute-storage-net/network-plugins/) allow pods to communicate even when the source pod destination pod are running on different nodes. Network plugins achieve this in different ways. Networks plugins are also known as _CNI plugins_.
```
Is it necessary to point to something specific? What if the content of the article changes? I think it's enough to point directly to the article.

You might discover a different variant of this architecture and components that you prefer to run in your environment. However, it should meet some or all of the network requirements noted above.

### Containers on the same pod

Containers within a pod share their network namespaces including their IP address and MAC addresses.

Containers within a pod can all reach each other's ports on
`localhost:port number`. If you examine a pod you will see a `lo0` interface used for localhost communications between containers in the pod network namespace. 

Figure 2 illustrates an example of localhost communications between two containers on the same pod. You define a pod 1 network namespace that provides pod 1 with its own isolated network stack. Your containers on pod 1 share a single IP and MAC address; Containers on pod 1 are configured with separate port numbers.

{{< figure src="/docs/images/k8net-localhost.drawio.svg" alt="k8s localhost" class="diagram-large" caption="Figure 2. Example of container 1 communication with container 2 using localhost:port number" >}}

Your containers within a pod must coordinate port usage, but this is no different from processes in a VM.  

> How you implement this is a detail of the particular container runtime you employ in your environment .

Reviewer: ```suggestion
How you implement this is a detail of the particular container runtime you employ in your environment.
```

{{< note >}}
The container networking _examples_ shown below do not imply or describe a specific implementation. They are simply examples used to illustrate the container network functions defined in the K8s network model.  
{{< /note >}}

## Requirements

Every [Pod](/docs/concepts/workloads/pods/) in your cluster gets its own unique cluster-wide IP address called a _pod IP_. 

If you have deployed an [IPv4/IPv6 dual stack](/docs/concepts/services-networking/dual-stack/) cluster,
then you - or your network plugin(s) - must allocate pod IPs for IPv4 and IPv6 for each pod.

This is performed per [_address family_](https://www.iana.org/assignments/address-family-numbers/address-family-numbers.xhtml), with one for IPv4 addresses and one for IPv6 addresses. You can assign an Ethernet MAC address to each Pod. Kubernetes does not require that a Pod has a unique identity at the data-link layer.

Kubernetes imposes the following requirements on any networking
implementation (barring any intentional network segmentation policies):

   * pods can communicate with all other pods on any other [node](/docs/concepts/architecture/nodes/) 
     without NAT

>    * agents on a node (e.g. system daemons, kubelet) can communicate with all

Reviewer 2: this is important, is reflected in other place?

Author: Yes but I'll put the "agents on a node" bullet back in.

> * Pods can communicate with other Pods on the same or separate nodes using layer 2 bridging, native layer 3 (IPv4, IPv6) networking, MPLS, segment routing, tunneling, or other techniques for conveying packets from one Pod to another.

Reviewer 2: I prefer the existing paragraph, why do we need to enumerate all the network technologies?

Author: Some new readers from the networking world or operators who have deployed SRv6, for example, may wish to know if a protocol can accommodate K8s network model. Vendors, operators, students, network architects, etc. have discussed these topics.

Author: Also Kubernetes added IPv6 after IPv4. See your point though.

Inter-container connectivity on the same Pod makes use of pod IPs, network namespaces and localhost networking.

> Pods run in their own [network namespace](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man7/network_namespaces.7.html). All the containers in a Pod share this network namespace. (Network namespaces are not the same as the Kubernetes {{< glossary_tooltip text="namespace" term_id="namespace" >}} concept).

Reviewer 2: yeah, and there is windows too :/

> Pods run in their own [network namespace](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man7/network_namespaces.7.html). All the containers in a Pod share this network namespace. (Network namespaces are not the same as the Kubernetes {{< glossary_tooltip text="namespace" term_id="namespace" >}} concept).

Author: Okay. I have not pushed a commit in several weeks.

> Pods run in their own [network namespace](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man7/network_namespaces.7.html). All the containers in a Pod share this network namespace. (Network namespaces are not the same as the Kubernetes {{< glossary_tooltip text="namespace" term_id="namespace" >}} concept).

Reviewer 3: Sorry, might not have been clear - by “previous version” I mean the red colored text from that latest actual commit (vs. my suggestion).

They are both OK to merge, even if I prefer making the Linux detail clear.

> Figure 2 illustrates an example of localhost communications between two containers on the same Pod. 

Reviewer 2: is not very illustrative, containers will use sockets directly to connect to the other socket, I really can't think about good way. of illustrate it

Author: Researching. I have only read about localhost communications.

{{< figure src="/docs/images/k8s-localhost-02.drawio.svg" alt="diagram of K8s local networking for containers in a single Pod" class="diagram-large" caption="Figure 2. Example of container communications within the same Pod using localhost:port number" >}}

Your Pod 1 containers share a network namespace, IP address and MAC address. However, you do need to configure separate port numbers for each container.

### Pods on the same node

> Inter-pod connectivity on the same node utilize pod IPs, Pod and root network namespaces, [veth links](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man4/veth.4.html) and a [virtual L2 bridge](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Data_link_layer).

Reviewer 2: this is an implementation details, not all of them use virtual bridges, actually that should be discourage on favor of ptp interfaces for security ...

Author: I had this: `L2 or L3 networking between the Pods. This example uses a virtual L2 bridge. You might use a different approach supported by your network plugin.`

I'll incorporate your points.

> Pods operate in their own network namespace and have their own IP and MAC addresses. You can think of this as multiple distinct IP computers (pods), that wish to talk with each other through a L2 bridge. Inter-pod networking on the same node is no different.

Reviewer 2: the bridge is an implementation details and is not the best one

Author: Seems like  it sufficed as a basic and well-understood implementation example. I'll change text to clarify your points.

Reviewer 3: We can teach that a bridge is a common / simple implementation; we must avoid implying that it's mandatory. Even _Ethernet_ itself isn't part of the Kubernetes network model - virtual or otherwise.

This example of inter-pod networking on the same node requires:

* Root network namespace for the node. 

> * Veth links enabling communication between the Pod network namespace and root network namespace. 

Reviewer 3: Whilst this is true, I'm worried that readers will infer that _all_ inter-pod packet networking requires a veth.

Author: There are a large number of K8s network blogs already out there. Would we add any value? New reader sees the components, wonders how this could work with simple examples and then off they go to google or K8s blog? 

I have always appreciated "one stop shop" for architecture and then implementation examples. Now I have "jumping off point" to dig deeper. Networking is hard; examples in close proximity is a must for learning, IMO.  

We have [K8s Components](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/overview/components/). Perhaps I could zoom in to the nodes and add the core network components?

Reviewer 3: I like this diagram; it's just that I'm confident lots of people will misunderstand what we're saying, unless we reframe the explanation.

* L2 or L3 networking between the Pods. This example uses a virtual L2 bridge. You might use a different approach supported by your network plugin.

Figure 3 illustrates an example of two Pods talking to each other on the same node. 

{{< figure src="/docs/images/k8net-PodSameHost04.drawio.svg" alt="diagram of 2 Pods on the same node using an L2 bridge" class="diagram-large" caption="Figure 3. Example of Pod 1 and Pod 2 on the same node communicating through a L2 bridge" >}}

### Pods on different nodes

#### Physical network

Your Kubernetes deployment might place Pods on a network of nodes. With this topology, you can distribute your workloads across many Pods to increase scale and resiliency. Inter-pod networking between distinct nodes becomes a crucial function for your cluster network. 

In all scenarios involving inter-node Pod networking (physical or virtual), you will have a physical network in place. This provides you with communications between different network resources needed for K8s and non-K8s application support, APIs, metrics collection, operations and troubleshooting. 

> For a K8s-specific example, you could have a process call the control plane API server to issue an HTTP request to a node kubelet. 

Reviewer 2: I can not fully understand this sentence sorry?

Reviewer 2: the way this can work is the kubelet register itsefl with the apiserver creating the corresponding node object that represent itself.
It can also happen that the apiserver connects to the kubelet to perform some operations like "kubectl exec" per example

Reviewer 3: You might only be configuring a virtual network; for example, in the cloud, where the underlying physical network is abstracted away.

Figure 4 depicts the physical network supporting this API example.

{{< figure src="/docs/images/k8s-api-to-kubelet-example.drawio.svg" alt="diagram of k8s API server to node kubelet" class="diagram-large" caption="Figure 4. Example of control plane to node communications using the physical network" >}}

> In addition to addressing your K8s inter-node Pod networking requirements, your physical network can support NTP, IPsec IKEv2, OAM tasks and others specific to your environment.

Reviewer 2: I don't know if we should go into those details, is just a network, people can run more things, maybe you want to highlight that is not necessary a kubernetes only network?

Author: Got it.

The network plugin exposes Pods (pod IP) to the physical network addressing and forwarding. In essence your Pods become IP host end-points reachable by all other end-points on the physical network. You can leverage existing network transport, address management, performance, security and operational best-practices to support your Pod networking requirements.

To ensure Pod access integrity, you should apply [pod security](/docs/concepts/security/pod-security-standards) measures along with one or more network functions designed to protect hosts from malicious attacks. Examples include packet filters, address management, network segmentation, authentication and encryption. 

The physical network approach offers you several advantages:

* Common physical network to handle K8s and non-K8s traffic.
* Optimal network performance.
* Enhanced security with a CNI plugin that handles encrypted communications such as IPsec or TLS.

The challenges to you include CNI plugin management and non-K8s network operations impact to your cluster.

> For more information on two examples of physical network implementations, see [Calico BGP](https://github.com/projectcalico/calico) and [Cilium native-routing](https://docs.cilium.io/en/v1.13/network/concepts/routing/#native-routing).

Reviewer 3: There's a detail missing here: the bridging. The node is using a software bridge to make each Pod appear as if it has a physical connection. The node still only has one network interface.

Author: Is the software bridge the virtual L2 bridge or something different?

Reviewer 3: The text is what could mislead; eg: _The network plugin exposes Pods (pod IP) to the physical network addressing and forwarding._

That's where I'd mention the use of a bridge. There actually are designs where each Pod gets its own network interface that can talk directly to things outside the node. This isn't one of those designs.

{{< note >}}
A physical network is sometimes referred to as a _physical underlay network_. This because it is transporting virtual overlay network packets.   
{{< /note >}}

Figure 7 shows an example of a virtual overlay network composed of two pods running on separate nodes and connected via virtual overlay network tunnel. It uses pod and root network namespaces, network plugins, tunnel encapsuation/decapsulation, and a physical underlay network.
 
{{< figure src="/docs/images/k8s-net-virtual-overlay.drawio.svg" alt="diagram of 2 x k8s pods on separate nodes using virtual tunnels" class="diagram-large" caption="Figure 7. Example of Pod 1 - Pod 2 networking on different nodes using a virtual overlay network tunnel" >}}

In this example, the network plugin has set up a _virtual overlay network_. Pod packets sourced on one node and destined for Pods 
on a different node are encapsulated and sent over a tunnel mechanism such as [GENEVE](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Generic_Network_Virtualization_Encapsulation). 

The destination node retrieves the encapsulated pod packet, strips off the encap header, and then sends it to the target Pod, providing that there are no

> [NetworkPolicy](/docs/concepts/services-networking/network-policies/) restrictions to block that packet.

Reviewer 3: For this example, consider sending the VPN traffic over a second host interface. I'd like to make the point that nodes can have more than one interface.

Author: Got it!

In the multi-node case (Node 1 and Node 2), you have container connectivity between pods on nodes connected via a network(s). You can also see in this case that network functions are required on both nodes.

{{< note >}}
The network model supports network connectivity between control plane components on the same or different nodes.
{{< /note >}}

Kubernetes networking supports container network connectivity over different cluster topologies. You can look over some of the container networking functions described in the _examples_ below.

* [Containers on the same pod](#containers-on-the-same-pod)
* [Pods on the same node](#pods-on-the-same-node)
* [Pods on different nodes using a virtual overlay network](#pods-on-different-nodes-using-a-virtual-overlay-network)
* [Pods on different nodes WITHOUT using a virtual overlay network](#pods-on-different-nodes-without-using-a-virtual-overlay-network)

## Requirements

Every [pod](/docs/concepts/workloads/pods/) in your cluster gets its own unique cluster-wide IP address called a _pod IP_. 

> If you have deployed an [IPv4/IPv6 dual stack](/docs/concepts/service-networking/dual-stack.md) cluster, then you must allocate pod IPs for IPv4 and IPv6.  a can allocate pod IP) ;This is performed on per [_address family_](https://www.iana.org/assignments/address-family-numbers/address-family-numbers.xhtml), so a cluster that uses IPv4 and IPv6 networking assigns one IPv4 address and IPv6 address respectively to each pod.

Author: Definitely not ready. Couple of more days needed.

This model offers the following advantages:

> * Clean, backwards-compatible approach where `Pods` can be treated 

Author: Change added manually. Should I capitalize Pods for all instances in this PR?

> * Clean, backwards-compatible approach where `Pods` can be treated 

Reviewer 3: > capitalize Pods for all instances in this PR?

Only when you're talking about Pods as things in the API. For example, if you're talking about a set of cgroups and namespaces that hold some containers, then no: call it a “pod”, lowercase.

> * Clean, backwards-compatible approach where `Pods` can be treated 

Author: got it!

much like VMs or physical hosts from the perspectives of port allocatio and networking.
* Supports naming, service discovery, [load balancing](/docs/concepts/services-networking/ingress/#load-balancing), 
application configuration and migration.
  
The network model is not only less complex overall, but it is compatible
with the desire for Kubernetes to enable low-friction porting of your apps from VMs
to containers. If your app previously ran in a VM, your VM had an IP address and could
talk to other VMs in your project. This is the same basic model.

Kubernetes imposes the following requirements on any networking
implementation (barring any intentional network segmentation policies):

* Containers in same pod can communicate with each other.
* Pods can communicate with all other pods on the same or separate [nodes](/docs/concepts/architecture/nodes/)
without network address translation (NAT).
* Pods can communicate with other pods on the same or separate nodes using layer 2 bridging, native layer 3 (IPv4, IPv6) networking, tunneling, or other techniques for conveying packets from one pod to another.

> Some platforms, such as Linux, support pods running in the host network. Pods attached to the host network of a node can still communicate with all pods on all nodes without NAT.

Author: Added windows. Change host network to `hostNetwork`?

Inter-container connectivity on the same pod makes use of  pod IPs, network namespaces and localhost networking.

Each pod has its own IP address (pod IP) ; this is per [_address family_](https://www.iana.org/assignments/address-family-numbers/address-family-numbers.xhtml), so a cluster that uses IPv4 and IPv6 networking assigns one IPv4 address and IPv6 address respectively to each pod.

You can assign an Ethernet mac address to each pod. Kubernetes does not require that a Pod has a unique identity at the data-link layer.

Pods run in their own [network namespace](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man7/network_namespaces.7.html). All the containers in a pod share this network namespace. (Network namespaces are not the same as the Kubernetes {{< glossary_tooltip text="namespace" term_id="namespace" >}} concept).

Containers within a pod can all reach each other's ports on`localhost:port number`. If you examine a pod you will see a `lo0` interface used for localhost communications between containers in the pod network namespace. 

Figure 2 illustrates an example of localhost communications between two containers on the same pod, Pod 1, running on a single node, Node 1. 

> {{< figure src="/docs/images/k8s-localhost-02.drawio.svg" alt="k8s localhost" class="diagram-large" caption="Figure 2. Container communications within the same pod using localhost:port number" >}}

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
{{< figure src="/docs/images/k8s-localhost-02.drawio.svg" alt="Kubernetes local networking within a Pod" class="diagram-large" caption="Figure 2. Container communications within the same pod using localhost:port number" >}}
```

Author: Changed added manually.

You define a pod 1 network namespace that provides pod 1 with its own isolated network stack. Your containers on pod 1 share a single IP and MAC address; Containers on pod 1 are configured with separate port numbers.

Your containers within a pod must coordinate port usage, but this is no different from processes in a VM.  

### Pods on the same node

Your cluster deployment might include two or more pods running on the same node. You might also require communications between your pods on the same node. 

Pods operate in their own network namespace and have their own IP and MAC addresses. You can think of this as multiple distinct IP computers, pods, that want to talk with each other. Inter-pod networking on the same node is no different.

This example of inter-pod networking on the same host requires:

* Communication between the pod network namespaces and root network namespace. The establishment of a veth p2p links accomplishes this.

* L2 or L3 networking between the pods. This example uses a virtual L2 bridge. Your implementation might use a different approach implemented in a network plugin.

Figure 3 illustrates an example of two pods talking each other on the same node. 

> {{< figure src="/docs/images/k8net-PodSameHost03.drawio.svg" alt="k8s pods samehost" class="diagram-large" caption="Figure 3. Example of Pod 1 and Pod 2 on Node 1 communicating with each other" >}}

Reviewer 3: (nit)
A longer alt attribute would help.

* Physical underlay network - Network resources such as routers or switches that forward packets between nodes. 

* Virtual ethernet link ([veth](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man4/veth.4.html)) - Virtual link allowing you to convey packets between namespaces. 

* [Network namespace](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man7/network_namespaces.7.html) - Form of isolation where resources share a network stack, memory, processing and so on.

* [CNI](https://www.cni.dev/) - Container network interface providing network configuration, IP address allocation and possibly CNI-specific methods for packet forwarding to enable inter-pod networking. 

## Architecture components

The Kubernetes network model introduces a flexible architecture and accompanying components. You can configure a combination of different components to best meet your cluster networking requirements. 

Figure 1 illustrates the Kubernetes network architecture and accompanying components used in the examples below. 

{{< figure src="/docs/images/k8net-net-arch2.drawio.svg" alt="k8s net arch" class="diagram-large" caption="Figure 1. K8s Network Architecture and Components" >}}

> The architecture and components consist of the following:

Author: Mm ... With my new reader hat on, I might ask "Example of what? Where did those examples come from?" 

All network systems have an architecture. Maybe we call it something else like "K8s Network Model Examples". Diagrams can be simplified/streamlined to keep it simple for the new reader in this first PR with network pictures. Now new readers can dive into the different examples or use-cases.

> The architecture and components consist of the following:

Reviewer 3: I'll try an analogy. If you're trying to draw up the [MVC](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Model%E2%80%93view%E2%80%93controller) pattern, you wouldn't mention the implementation-specific details such as [`NSEditorRegistration`](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/appkit/nseditorregistration). You can do MVC without using Apple's ecosystem.

However, you also might want to provide a non-abstract example to help people learn, and that's fine.

When I commented, there were a bunch of implementation specifics such as veth pairs. I want to avoid implying that these are always part of the architecture.

> * Nodes configured in virtual (VM) or physical (bare-metal) environments.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Nodes, running as Linux virtual machines (Kubernetes also supports running on physical servers,
  and you can use either Windows or Linux as a node operating system)
```

> * Pods configured on each node with one or more containers.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Pods running on each node with one or more containers. This example only has two pods in the cluster,
  to make the diagrams simpler.
```

  
* Each pod has its own IP address (Pod IP) ; this is per [_address family_](https://www.iana.org/assignments/address-family-numbers/address-family-numbers.xhtml), so a cluster that uses IPv4 and IPv6 networking assigns one IPv4 address and IPv6 address respectively to each pod.
  
  * Pods run in their own [network namespace](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man7/network_namespaces.7.html). All the containers in a pod share this
    network namespace. (Network namespaces are not the same as the Kubernetes
    {{< glossary_tooltip text="namespace" term_id="namespace" >}} concept).
    
  * You can assign an Ethernet mac address to each pod.
    Kubernetes does not require that a Pod has a unique identity at the data-link layer.
 

> * Pods use a virtual point-to-point veth "link" between the pod network namespace and root network namespace. This allows pod packets to utilize network functions defined in the root network namespace.  

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* The network plugin configures a virtual point-to-point veth link between the pod network namespace and
  the node's root network namespace. This allows pod packets to utilize network functions defined in the
  root network namespace (for example: health check traffic from the kubelet to the pod).
```

> * L2bridge is a virtual L2 bridge that allows attachment, configuration and communications between pods on the same node. Depending on your deployment of container runtimes and CNI plugins, the bridge function could be implemented within the CNI plugin itself.  

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* L2bridge is a virtual [layer 2](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/OSI_model#Layer_2:_Data_link_layer) bridge
  that allows attachment, configuration and communications between pods on the same node.
  Depending on your deployment of container runtimes and network plugins, the local packet forwarding
  function could be implemented within the network plugin itself.
```

> * [Network plugins](/docs/concepts/extend-kubernetes/compute-storage-net/network-plugins/) allow pods to communicate even when the source pod destination pod are running on different nodes. Network plugins achieve this in different ways. Networks plugins are also known as _CNI plugins_.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* A [_network plugin_](/docs/concepts/extend-kubernetes/compute-storage-net/network-plugins/) sets up
  container networking and allows pods to communicate even when the source pod destination pod are
  running on different nodes.
  Network plugins achieve this in different ways. Networks plugins are also known as _CNI plugins_.
```

> * Virtual overlay network consists of a network of tunnels connecting pods running on different nodes.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* The virtual _overlay network_ consists of a network of tunnels connecting different nodes, using
   IP addresses from the IP address range that is allocated for use by pods. In this example, the
   node's host network adapter is in one address range, and pods are in a different address range.
```

> * Physical underlay network, composed of L2 switches, L3 routers, load balancers for example, transport packets between nodes. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* An _underlay network_ that the nodes are connected to. For example, if you run secure shell
  (SSH) on a node, the SSH daemon is typically listening on an address associated with this
  underlay network. The kubelet also uses the underlay network to communicate with the
  control plane.
```

* [Pods on the same node](#pods-on-the-same-node)
* [Pods on different nodes using a virtual overlay network](#pods-on-different-nodes-using-a-virtual-overlay-network)
* [Pods on different nodes using a physical underlay network](#pods-on-different-nodes-using-a-physical-underlay-network)

You might discover a different variant of this architecture and components that you prefer to run in your environment. However, it should meet some or all of the network requirements noted above.

### Containers on the same pod

Containers within a pod share their own network namespaces including their IP address and MAC addresses.

Containers within a pod can all reach each other's ports on
`localhost:port number`. If you examine a pod you will see a `lo0` interface used for localhost communications between containers in the pod network namespace. 

Figure 2 illustrates an example of localhost communications between two containers on the same pod. You define a pod 1 network namespace that provides pod 1 with its own isolated network stack. Your containers on pod 1 share a single IP and MAC address; Containers on pod 1 are configured with separate port numbers.

> {{< figure src="/docs/images/k8net-localhost.drawio.svg" alt="k8s localhost" class="diagram-large" caption="Figure 2. Example of container communications  within the same pod using localhost:port number" >}}

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
{{< figure src="/docs/images/k8net-localhost.drawio.svg" alt="Line drawing diagram showing two containers in a Pod communicating" class="diagram-large" caption="Figure 2. Example of container communications  within the same pod using localhost:port number" >}}
```

> Your containers within a pod must coordinate port usage, but this is no different from processes in a VM.  

Reviewer 3: How about:
```suggestion
When you define a Pod, you must make sure that the different containers in that Pod do not conflict
over network port use; this is no different from processes in a VM, or daemons running directly on a physical server machine.
```
?

How you implement this is a detail of the particular container runtime you employ in your environment.

> It is possible to request ports or call host ports on the node itself which forward packets to your pod. This is a very niche operation. How you implement this is a detail of the container runtime. The pod itself is blind to the existence or non-existence of host ports.

Reviewer 3: I would not mention that detail here; I'm not even sure how you configure it within Kubernetes.

### Pods on the same node

You cluster deployment might include two or more pods running on the same node. You might also require communications between your pods on the same node. 

Pods operate in their own namespace and have their own IP and MAC addresses. You can think of this as multiple distinct IP computers that want to talk with each other. Inter-pod networking on the same node is no different.

This example of inter-pod networking on the same host requires:

* Communication between the pod network namespaces and root network namespace. The establishment of a veth p2p links accomplishes this.

> * L2 or L3 networking between the pods. This example uses a virtual L2 bridge. Your implementation might use a different approach implemented in a network plugin.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Layer 3 networking between the pods. This example uses a virtual layer 2 bridge that connects all
   the Pods on a node. Your cluster might use a different approach.
```

Figure 3 illustrates an example of two pods talking each other on the same node. 

{{< figure src="/docs/images/k8net-PodSameHost03.drawio.svg" alt="k8s pods samehost" class="diagram-large" caption="Figure 3. Example of Pod 1 and Pod 2 on Node 1 communicating with each other" >}}

 
### Pods on different nodes

> Your Kubernetes deployment might place pods on a network of nodes. With this pod topology, you can distribute your workloads across many pods to increase scale and resiliency. Inter-pod networking between distinct nodes becomes a crucial function of your cluster network. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Kubernetes is designed to run at scale, with at least two nodes (for resilience) or even thousands of nodes.
No matter how many nodes you have, Kubernetes is designed to support inter-pod networking between
distinct nodes, without any host being a single point of failure. Networking between pods is  a crucial
function of your cluster.
```

> #### Container network interface

Reviewer 3: I would move this section to be either:
- a 2nd level heading, that comes just before `## Design principles for Kubernetes networking`
- a new separate page

In place of the moved text, put a one-paragraph summary and a link to its new home.

Network plugins support container networking across pods and nodes in your cluster environment. You can think of network plugins as the software responsible for container runtime interface attachment and detachment, pod IP address allocation and network function configuration such as tunnel setup, BGP and IP routing.  

{{< note >}}

> Network plugins are generally referred to as CNI plugins.

Reviewer 3: (nit)
```suggestion
Network plugins are often referred to as CNI plugins.
```

{{< /note >}}

> CNI plugins adhere to the specifications defined in the [container network interface](https://www.cni.dev/). The rational behind the development of the CNI was to avoid code duplication, simplify container network configuration and operations, and guarantee cluster compatibility. Most importantly, it offers the Kubernetes community a uni specification for building and deploying container networking functions in cluster networks. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
CNI plugins adhere to the specifications defined in the [container network interface](https://www.cni.dev/).
The rationale behind the development of the CNI was to avoid code duplication, simplify container network
configuration and operations, and guarantee cluster compatibility.
Most importantly, CNI offers the Kubernetes community a unified specification for implementing
container networking functions in cluster networks.
```

> The CNI provides a [specification](https://www.cni.dev/docs/spec/), a Go [library for CNI application and integration](https://github.com/containernetworking/cni/blob/main/libcni) and a [command-line tool](https://github.com/containernetworking/cni/blob/main/cnitool) for executing CNI plugins. You can find reference plugins and a template in a [separate repository](https://github.com/containernetworking/plugins) if you wish to build your own. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Along with the CNI [specification](https://www.cni.dev/docs/spec/), there is a Go library,
[libcni](https://github.com/containernetworking/cni/blob/main/libcni) for CNI application and integration,
and a [command-line tool](https://github.com/containernetworking/cni/blob/main/cnitool) for executing
CNI plugins. You can find reference plugins and a template in a [separate repository](https://github.com/containernetworking/plugins) if you wish to build your own.
```

> You will not find a single CNI plugin that addresses all of your requirements. In practice, you will likely employ multiple plugins that in some cases can be "chained" together to support your environment. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
CNI plugins are designed to work as part of the overall picture. Some provide basic utility functions - such
as `ptp` to provide a Linux veth pair, or `loopback` to make localhost work. Other network plugins are a
full implementation of pod-to-pod networking, that perhaps rely on the basic utility plugins to work.
You will typically not find a single CNI plugin that addresses all of your requirements. In practice,
you will likely employ multiple plugins that in some cases can be "chained" together to support your environment.
```
?

To learn more about CNI and plugins see the following:

* [Documentation](https://www.cni.dev/docs/)

* [Specification](https://www.cni.dev/docs/spec/)

* [Supported container runtimes](https://github.com/containernetworking/cni#container-runtimes)

* [Reference plugins](https://www.cni.dev/plugins/current/#reference-plugins)

> * [3rd party plugins](https://github.com/containernetworking/cni#3rd-party-plugins)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Selection of [3rd party plugins](https://github.com/containernetworking/cni#3rd-party-plugins)
```

> * [Introduction to CNI](https://youtu.be/YjjrQiJOyME)

Reviewer 3: (nit)
```suggestion
* [Introduction to CNI](https://youtu.be/YjjrQiJOyME) (video) on YouTube
```

* [CNI deep dive](https://youtu.be/zChkx-AB5Xc)

* [Webinar: Kubernetes and Networks](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GgCA2USI5iQ)

The examples in the following section illustrate the use of CNI plugins in achieving container network connectivity.

#### Pods on different nodes using a virtual overlay network

> This example uses a virtual overlay network to support inter-pod networking.  

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Because the two pods in this scenario are on two different nodes, packets first enter a local
virtual layer 2 bridge, then transit over an overlay network, and finally the layer
2 bridge on the target node. Your cluster might use a different approach.
```

> {{< figure src="/docs/images/k8net-net-overlay.drawio.svg" alt="k8s pods virtual overlay" class="diagram-large" caption="Figure 4. Example of Pod 1 - Pod 2 networking on different nodes using a virtual overlay network" >}}

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
{{< figure src="/docs/images/k8net-net-overlay.drawio.svg" alt="Diagram showing a virtual overlay network tunnel between two nodes; the tunnel is highlighted in red" class="diagram-large" caption="Figure 4. Example of Pod 1 - Pod 2 networking on different nodes using a virtual overlay network" >}}
```

In this example, the network plugin has set up an _virtual overlay network_. Packets that need to go
to a different node are encapsulated and sent over a tunnel mechanism such as
[GENEVE](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Generic_Network_Virtualization_Encapsulation). 

The destination node retrieves the inner packet and sends it to the target Pod, providing that there are no
[NetworkPolicy](/docs/concepts/services-networking/network-policies/) restrictions to block that packet.

The virtual overlay approach in this example offers several advantages: 

* Isolates the pod network from the physical underlay network. 

> * Enhanced security with a CNI plugin that handles encrypted communications such as IPsec.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Enhanced security: the tunnel traffic is encrypted, with GENEVE packets protected by IPsec.
  Again, your cluster might use a different design; this is just an example.
```

> A disadvantage to this approach is CNI plugin management, tunnel encap/decap performance overhead and network troubleshooting.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A disadvantage to this approach is CNI plugin management, the performance overhead of encapsulation/decapsulation, the management overhead for protecting and distributing encryption
key material, and more complex network troubleshooting.
```

> For more information on virtual overlay network implementations, see [Flannel](https://github.com/flannel-io/flannel) and [Weavenet](https://www.weave.works/docs/net/latest/overview/). 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We avoid linking to specific implementations that are not part of Kubernetes, other than where required
for a cluster to operate. This doesn't feel like we'd have grounds for an exception.
```

#### Pods on different nodes using a physical underlay network

This example uses the _physical underlay network_ to support inter-pod networking. 

{{< figure src="/docs/images/k8net-net-phys-underlay.drawio.svg" alt="k8s pods physical underay" class="diagram-large" caption="Figure 5. Example of Pod 1 - Pod2 networking on different nodes using a physical underlay network" >}}

There several advantages to the physical underlay approach in this example. 

* No need for you to deploy and manage a separate virtual overlay network.   
* Leverage existing deployment routing protocols such as BGP, address management and operational troubleshooting.  

A disadvantage you might consider is the additional work to protect the pod network.

> For more information on physical network underlay implementations, see [Calico BGP](https://github.com/projectcalico/calico) and [Cilium native-routing](https://docs.cilium.io/en/v1.13/network/concepts/routing/#native-routing). 

Reviewer 3: :warning: This part doesn't look right. The underlay is jargon to describe the network fabric that the overlay network runs on top of.

For example: _imagine that you get 7 Raspberry Pi computers, plug 'em together with Ethernet cables and switches. That's going to be your underlay network. You can touch it and unplug it, if you want to._

_Now set up [Tailscale](https://tailscale.com/), or something like it. On each Pi._

_Get 7 more Raspberry Pis and connect them to a different subnet, again using Ethernet cables etc. Put them on the same Tailscale-managed overlay network. The overlay lets all the nodes talk to each other, even if the two sets of computers are in different rooms / buildings / countries._

Anyway, if you don't set up an overlay VPN, you've not got an underlay. What you have in the no-VPN, all-in-one-apartment case is “a network”.

The heading to use here could be “**#### Pods on different nodes without using an overlay network**”

Before we get to that heading, though, there is a use for the underlay. You need to talk to the Tailscale server. And it's how you set up basic services like NTP for time, or maybe SSH for diagnostics. We might want to hint at that detail before moving on.

In the example with a GENEVE overlay, the underlay network provides:
- transit for the GENEVE-encapsulated overlay traffic
- communication between nodes and control plane
- NTP (we might as well mention it, accurate time sync is a useful thing to have)
  some VM providers let you sync time from the host machine, mind
- IPsec management (IKEv2 and so forth)

and probably also provides:
- a way for load balancers to reach NodePorts on the VMs

I wouldn't mention BGP; it's a complexity best avoided here.

---

Maybe this scenario is best parked for now. How about explaining the scenario where the kubelet makes an HTTP request to a Pod to check whether it is alive? That's a host-to-pod scenario.

There's also a node-to-control-plane scenario you might want to draw; this'll use the underlay network only.

Author: The "underlay" jargon is defined/mentioned in multiple documents such as [Geneve: Generic Network Virtualization Encapsulation RFC 8926](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/rfc8926/), [An Architecture for Data-Center Network Virtualization over Layer 3 (NVO3)](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc8014) and many more. 

IMHO, the overlay/underlay paradigm is a simple pattern that new readers can make sense of, and one that is used in K8s clusters today. I think new diagrams might help visualize this better.

Reviewer 3: It's fine to have an underlay, but it only makes sense when we're also talking about an overlay. If that was the intent, I think the underlay diagram is fine to keep, but with changes - I think from a technical perspective it's not quite telling the right story.

Author: Sounds good. Let me hack some changes to better explain the underlay question and a few others you pointed out.
